\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@comment $Id@w{$}
@comment %**start of header
@setfilename lsh.info
@settitle Layla shell version 1.0
@syncodeindex pg cp
@comment %**end of header
@copying
This manual is for lsh - the Layla shell (version 1.0).

Copyright @copyright{} 2016, 2017, 2018, 2019 Mohammed Isam.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.7 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts, and with no Back-Cover
Texts. A copy of the license is included in the section entitled
``GNU Free Documentation License''.

@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Individual utilities
@direntry
* lsh: (Layla shell).           Using the Layla shell
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title lsh - the Layla shell
@subtitle for version 1.0
@author Mohammed Isam (@email{mohammed_isam1984@@yahoo.com})
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top lsh

This manual is for lsh - the Layla shell (version 1.0).

@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction::
* The Shell Command Language::
* Expansions and Substitutions::
* Shell Variables and Parameters::
* The Execution Environment::
* Command History and Editing::
* Builtin Utilities::
* GNU Free Documentation License::
* Index::
@end menu


@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction
@cindex Introduction


@section Synopsis
@cindex Synopsis

@example
lsh [-abBCdeEfghiklLmnpqrtTuvwxy] [-o opt] [-O extopt] [arg ...]
lsh [-abBCdeEfghiklLmnpqrtTuvwxy] [-o opt] [-O extopt] -c string [arg ...]
lsh [-abBCdeEfghiklLmnpqrtTuvwxy] [-o opt] [-O extopt] [-is] [arg ...]
@end example


@section About lsh
@cindex About lsh

Layla shell is a POSIX-compliant GNU/Linux shell. It aims to implement the
full functionality specified in the POSIX Shell & Utilities volume. This
volume describes the Shell Command Language, the general terminal interface,
and the builtin utilities of compliant shells. The full POSIX standard is
freely available from The Open Group's website at:
@url{https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799.2018edition/}
@*

Layla shell implements most of the POSIX-defined functionality. Specifically,
quoting, token recognition, words expansions, I/O redirection, reponses to
error conditions, the shell command language, the standard shell execution
environment, signal handling, and the general and special builtin utilities
are all implemented and behave in a way that is conforming to the POSIX
standard. Pattern matching and pathname expansion relies on external tools,
and thus might not behave exactly as specified in the POSIX standard. The
shell grammar has been extended to accommodate some of the widely used non-
POSIX words, such as the function and [[ keywords and the (( )) arithmetic
expansion operator. In all of these situations, we followed ksh behaviour,
as ksh is the "model" POSIX shell, the one upon which the Shell & Utilities
volume was modeled in the first place. But ksh is not the only shell out
there. This is why we included features from other shells, most notably bash,
the most widely used shell nowadays.
@*

To better understand the inner workings of this (as well as any other POSIX-
compliant shell), it would be better if you got a copy of the Linux Shell
Internals book, published by No Starch Press. This shell and the book has been
developed hand-in-hand. The book helps to explain the code of this shell and
provide a walk-through for newcomers. Although the code is extensively
commented, a lot of theoretical ground has covered in the book, not in the
source code. If you really want to understand how and why Unix/Linux shells
behave in the context of POSIX, I honestly advise you to get a copy of the
book.
@*

There is still a long way to go with testing, bug-fixing and improving Layla
shell, and your feedback is more than welcome in this regard. If you have a
bug report, or you want to suggest adding some feature or fixing something
with the shell, feel free to email me directly at my email address, the one
you will find in the beginning of this file. If you have any bugfixes, patches
or feature improvements you want to add to the code, feel free to send me your
code at the email address above, or through the Linux Shell Internals
repository at GitHub:
@url{https://github.com/moisam/Linux-Shell-Internals-book/}


@section Options
@cindex Options

@table @code
@item --
End of options.
@item --help
Print command line help and exit.
@item --init-file, --rcfile
Specify the startup script file to read instead of the default @code{~/.lshrc}.
@item --login, -l
Start a login shell (as if called by the @code{login} utility).
@item --noprofile
Do not read login startup scripts @code{/etc/profile} and @code{~/.profile}.
@item --norc
Do not read the startup script files @code{/etc/lshrc} and @code{~/.lshrc}.
@item --restricted
Start the shell in the restricted mode.
@item --verbose
Turn on the @code{-v} option, so commands are printed as they are read.
@item --version
Display shell version and exit.
@item -o opt, +o opt
Turn on '-' or off '+' shell options, as if calling the @code{set} builtin utility.
@item -O extopt, +O extopt
Turn on '-' or off '+' extended shell options, as if calling the @code{setx} (or the @code{shopt}) builtin utility.
@end table


@section Package dependencies
@cindex Package dependencies

Layla shell has very few external dependencies, in order to ease the process
of compiling and installing it. You only need to have the GNU C library
installed, in addition to the GNU Compiler Collection (GCC) or the Clang/LLVM
compiler.
@*

If you are using any GNU/Linux distro, it would be better if you checked your
distro's official repositories, as these tools are installed by default on
most systems. If, by a sore chance, you needed to manually download and
install them, here are the links:
@*

@itemize @bullet
@item GNU C Library: https://www.gnu.org/software/libc/
@item GCC: https://gcc.gnu.org/
@item LLVM: http://releases.llvm.org/download.html
@end itemize


@section How to compile and install
@cindex How to compile and install

If you downloaded the shell as a source tarball, navigate to the directory
where you downloaded the tarball:

@example
$ cd ~/Downloads
@end example

then extract the archive and enter the extracted directory:

@example
$ tar xvf lsh-1.0
$ cd lsh-1.0/
@end example

then run:

@example
$ make && make install
@end example

and that's it! Now you can run the shell by invoking:

@example
$ lsh
@end example


@section Files
@cindex Files

The following files are used by the shell:

@table @file
@item /etc/profile
The system initialization file (executed by a login shell).
@item /etc/lshrc
The system-wide startup file (executed by an interactive shell).
@item $HOME/.profile
The personal initialization file (executed by a login shell
after executing @file{/etc/profile}).
@item $HOME/.lshrc
The default personal initialization file (executed after
@file{/etc/lshrc} by an interactive shell).
@item $HOME/.lsh_history
The default personal initialization file (executed after @file{/etc/lshrc}).
@item /dev/null
The NULL device.
@item /etc/logout
Shell script executed on logout.
@item $HOME/logout
Shell script executed on logout after @file{/etc/logout}.
@item /etc/passwd
Default file used to perform ~user substitutions.
@end table


@section Features
@cindex Features

@itemize
@item
Shell language and interpreter are mostly POSIX-compliant
@item
Standard POSIX regular and special builtins conforming to POSIX
@item
Extended features and utilities borrowed from ksh, bash and tcsh
@item
Well documented source code
@end itemize


@section TODO
@cindex TODO

@itemize
@item
Add support for Unicode strings and message translation
@item
Implement more bash-like and ksh-like builtin utilities, such as
@code{print} and @code{printf}
@item
Ensure the builtin utilities (and the shell program itself) are POSIX-compliant
@item
Testing, bug reporting, debugging and improving the shell
@end itemize



@node The Shell Command Language
@chapter The Shell Command Language
@cindex The Shell Command Language

@section Commands
@cindex Commands

Commands can be either simple or compound commands, and can be grouped
together to form pipelines and lists. Every command that executes
returns an exit status to the shell. An exit status of zero is considered
success (or true, when used as a value for logical testing). A
non-zero exit status is considered failure (or false).
@*

A simple command is a list of variable assignments and words separated
by whitespace. The first word usually specifies the name of the command
to be executed, the remaining words are word-expanded and passed as
arguments to the command. The command name is passed as argument number
0. If the command exits normally, the exit status is 0-128. If it
terminates abnormally, the exit status is 128+signum (similar to bash, but
not ksh). The name of the signal can be obtained by passing the -l
option to the kill builtin utility.
@*

A pipeline is a sequence of one or more commands separated by the pipe
operator @code{|}. The standard output (stdout) of each command except the
last is connected by a pipe to the standard input (stdin) of the next
command. Each command is run in a separate process. The shell waits for
all commands to terminate. The exit status of a pipeline is the exit
status of the last command unless the pipefail @code{-l} option is enabled,
in which case it is the exit status of the rightmost command with non-
zero exit status. Each pipeline can be preceded by the bang reserved
word @code{!}. This causes the exit status of the pipeline to be inverted,
i.e. an exit status of zero becomes 1, otherwise it becomes zero.
@*

A list is a sequence of one or more pipelines separated by @code{;}, @code{&},
@code{|&}, @code{&&}, or @code{|}. The @code{;} causes sequential (foreground) execution of
the preceding pipeline. The shell waits for foreground pipelines to
finish execution. The @code{&} causes asynchronous (background) execution of
the preceding pipeline. The shell does not wait for background pipelines
to finish execution. The @code{|&} causes asynchronous execution of
the preceding pipeline, redirecting both stdout and stderr to the pipe.
This is similar to bash behavior, while ksh uses this operator to
establish a two-way pipe between the command and the parent shell. The
symbols @code{&&} and @code{||} cause the list following it to be executed only
if the preceding pipeline returns a zero or non-zero value, respectively.
Semicolons @code{;} can be substituted by newlines in lists.
@*

Compound commands include @strong{for}, @strong{select}, @strong{until}
and @strong{while} loops; @strong{case} and @strong{if} conditionals;
subshells and brace groups. The exit status of a compound
command is that of the last simple command executed in the compound.
All loops conform to the POSIX standard, except when it says otherwise.

@heading for name [ in word ... ]; do list; done
Each time the @strong{for} loop is executed, @code{name} is set to the next @code{word} taken
from the word list. If the word list is omitted, the @strong{for} loop behaves
as if @code{in "$@@"} was provided (which loops on positional parameters,
starting from 1). The loop exits when there are no more words in the
list.

@heading (( [expr1] ; [expr2] ; [expr3] )); do list; done
The arithmetic expression @code{expr1} is evaluated. Arithmetic expression
@code{expr2} is then evaluated repeatedly until it evaluates to zero. Every
time @code{expr2} evaluates to non-zero, @code{list} is executed and arithmetic
expression @code{expr3} is evaluated. If any expression is omitted, it behaves
as if it evaluated to 1. This loop is a non-POSIX extension.

@heading select name [ in word ... ]; do list; done
The @strong{select} loop prints the set of words on stderr, each preceded by its
numeric index. If the list of words is omitted, the loop behaves as if
@code{in "$@@"} was provided (which loops on positional parameters, starting
from 1). The @code{$PS3} prompt is printed and a single line is read from
stdin. If the read line consists of the number of one of the listed
words, the value of variable name is set to the word corresponding to
this number. If the read line is empty, the selection list is printed
again. In all other cases, variable name is set to null. The contents
of the read line is saved in the shell variable @code{$REPLY}. The list is
executed repeatedly until a break or @code{EOF} is encountered. If the @code{$REPLY}
variable is set to null as a side effect of executing list, the selection
list is printed again before displaying the @code{$PS3} prompt and waiting
for the next selection. This loop is a non-POSIX extension used by bash
and ksh.

@heading case word in [ [(] pattern [ | pattern ] ... ) list ;; ] ... esac
The @strong{case} conditional executes the @code{list} associated with the first pattern
that matches the given word. The form of the patterns is the same
as that used for file name generation (i.e. can contain the wildcards
@code{*}, @code{?} and @code{[]}). The @code{;;} operator causes execution of
the case to terminate. If @code{;&} is used instead, the next subsequent list, if any, is
executed. If @code{;;&} is used, the shell tries to match and execute
another case in the list. Both @code{;&} and @code{;;&} are non-POSIX
extensions used by shells like ksh and bash.

@heading if list1; then cmd-list1 [; elif list2; then cmd-list2 ] ... [; else cmd-list3 ]; fi
@code{list1} is executed and if it returns zero exit status, @code{cmd-list1}
is executed. Otherwise, @code{list2} is executed and if its value is zero,
@code{cmd-list2} is executed. If all @strong{elif} lists fail, the @strong{else}'s
@code{cmd-list3} is executed. If @code{list1} has non-zero exit status
and there is no @strong{else} clause, the @strong{if} command returns zero exit status.

@heading while conditional-list; do cmd-list; done
@heading until conditional-list; do cmd-list; done
The @strong{while} loop repeatedly executes the @code{conditional-list}
and if the exit status of the last command in the list is zero, it executes
@code{cmd-list}, otherwise the loop terminates. If no commands are executed from the
@code{cmd-list}, the @strong{while} loop returns a zero exit status. @strong{until} can be used
instead of @strong{while} to negate the loop termination test (i.e. execute
until @code{conditional-list} has zero exit status).

@heading (( expression ))
@code{expression} is evaluated as an arithmetic expression. If the value is
non-zero, the exit status is 0. Otherwise the exit status is 1. This is
a non-POSIX extension.

@heading ( list; )
Execute @code{list} in a separate environment, i.e. a subshell. If two adjacent
open parentheses are needed (for nesting subshells), a space must
be inserted between the two open parentheses to avoid evaluation as an
arithmetic expression. @code{@{} and @code{@}} are reserved words; they must occur
at the beginning of a line (after a newline character) or after a @code{;}
to be recognized.

@heading [[ expression ]]
Evaluate @code{expression} and return a zero exit status if @code{expression} evalues
to true (zero exit status). See @xref{Conditional Expressions} for a
description of what @code{expression} can be.

@heading function funcname @{ list ; @}
@heading funcname () @{ list ; @}
Define a function named @code{funcname}. The body of the function is the list
of commands between @code{@{} and @code{@}}. The body is executed when the function
is called, not when its defined. The exit status of the function definition
command is zero, unless an error occurs in adding the function
to the symbol table. The exit status of a function call is that of the
last command executed in the function, or the value passed to the
@code{return} builtin. The first syntax using the @code{function} keyword
is a non-POSIX extension used by bash and ksh.

@heading time [ pipeline ]
If @code{pipeline} is omitted, the user and system time for the current shell
and completed child processes is printed on stderr. Otherwise, the
@code{pipeline} is executed and the elapsed real time, as well as the user and
system times are printed on stderr. The @code{$TIMEFORMAT} variable controls
how the timing information should be displayed (See the @xref{Shell Variables}
section for a description of @code{$TIMEFORMAT}).


@section Reserved words
@cindex Reserved words

The following reserved words are recognized as reserved only when they are
the first unquoted word of a command:

@itemize
@item @code{case}
@item @code{do}
@item @code{done}
@item @code{else}
@item @code{elif}
@item @code{esac}
@item @code{for}
@item @code{fi}
@item @code{function}
@item @code{if}
@item @code{select}
@item @code{then}
@item @code{until}
@item @code{while}
@item @code{@{} @code{@}}
@item @code{!}
@end itemize

All reserved words (or keywords) are defined by POSIX, except @code{function} and @code{select}.


@section Variable assignments
@cindex Variable assignments

Simple commands can start with one or more variable assignments. Variable
assignments occurring after command names are recognized as such if the
@code{keyword} '@code{-k}' option is set. Assignments can also be passed
as arguments to the @code{export} or @code{readonly} special builtin utilities. The
syntax for an assignment takes the form of:

@example
varname=value
@end example

No space is permitted between @code{varname} and the '=', or between the '='
and @code{value}. Layla shell currently does not support the '+=' operator for variable
assignents.


@section Comments
@cindex Comments

The @code{#} character causes all the following characters up to the next
newline character to be commented, or ignored. Interactive shells recognize
comment characters when the extended option @code{interactive-comments}
(or @code{interactive_comments}) is set by calling the @code{setx} builtin
(which behaves similar to bash's @code{shopt}).


@node Conditional Expressions
@section Conditional Expressions
@cindex Conditional Expressions

Conditional expressions are used with the @code{[[} compound command to test
files' attributes and compare strings. Field splitting and pathname
expansion are not performed here.
@*

Conditional expressions can be formed by one or more of the following
unary and binary expressions:

@table @code
@item -a f
True if file @code{f} exists. This option is the same as @code{-e}.
@item -b f
True if file @code{f} exists and is a block special file.
@item -c f
True if file @code{f} exists and is a character special file.
@item -d f
True if file @code{f} exists and is a directory.
@item -e f
True if file @code{f} exists.
@item -f f
True if file @code{f} exists and is a regular file.
@item -g f
True if file @code{f} exists and it has its @code{setgid} bit set.
@item -G f
True if file @code{f} exists and its group id matches the effective
group id of this process.
@item -h f
True if file @code{f} exists and is a symbolic link.
@item -k f
True if file @code{f} exists and it has its sticky bit set.
@item -L f
True if file @code{f} exists and is a symbolic link.
@item -n str
True if the length of @code{str} is non-zero.
@item -N f
True if file @code{f} exists and its modification time is greater than
its last access time.
@item -o op
True if option named @code{op} is on.
@item -o ?op
True if @code{op} is a valid option name.
@item -O f
True if file @code{f} exists and is owned by the effective user id of
this process.
@item -p f
True if file @code{f} exists and is a FIFO special file or a pipe.
@item -r f
True if file @code{f} exists and is readable by current process.
@item -s f
True if file @code{f} exists and has size greater than zero.
@item -S f
True if file @code{f} exists and is a socket.
@item -t fd
True if file descriptor @code{fd} is open and associated with a terminal device.
@item -u f
True if file @code{f} exists and it has its @code{setuid} bit set.
@item -w f
True if file @code{f} exists and is writable by current process.
@item -x f
True if file @code{f} exists and is executable by current process.
@item -z str
True if the length of @code{str} is zero.
@item file1 -ef file2
True if both file1 and file2 exist and refer to the same file.
@item file1 -nt file2
True if @code{file1} exists and @code{file2} doesn't, or if @code{file1} is newer
than @code{file2}.
@item file1 -ot file2
True if @code{file2} exists and @code{file1} doesn't, or if @code{file1} is older
than @code{file2}.
@item string
True if @code{string} is not null.
@item string == pattern
True if @code{string} matches @code{pattern}.
@item string = pattern
Same as @code{==}.
@item string != pattern
True if @code{string} does not match @code{pattern}.
@item string =~ pattern
True if @code{string} matches @code{pattern}.
@item string1 < string2
True if @code{string1} comes before @code{string2} based on the ASCII value of
the strings' characters.
@item string1 > string2
True if @code{string1} comes after @code{string2} based on the ASCII value of
the strings' characters.
@item expr1 -eq expr2
True if @code{expr1} is equal to @code{expr2}.
@item expr1 -ge expr2
True if @code{expr1} is greater than or equal to @code{expr2}.
@item expr1 -gt expr2
True if @code{expr1} is greater than @code{expr2}.
@item expr1 -le expr2
True if @code{expr1} is less than or equal to @code{expr2}.
@item expr1 -lt expr2
True if @code{expr1} is less than @code{expr2}.
@item expr1 -ne expr2
True if @code{expr1} is not equal to @code{expr2}.
@end table

Compound expressions can be constructed from these primitives by using
any of the following operators (the brace operator is currently not
supported in this shell):

@table @code
@item (expression)
True if @code{expression} is true. Used to group expressions.
@item !expression
True if @code{expression} is false.
@item expression1 && expression2
True if @code{expression1} and @code{expression2} are both true.
@item expression1 || expression2
True if either @code{expression1} or @code{expression2} is true.
@end table



@node Expansions and Substitutions
@chapter Expansions and Substitutions
@cindex Expansions and Substitutions

@section Aliasing
@cindex Aliasing

The first word of each simple command is replaced by the text of an alias
if an alias for the command word has been defined. An alias name consists
of any number of alphanumeric characters and any of @code{_}, @code{!},
@code{%}, @code{,} and @code{@@}. The replacement string can contain any valid shell
command. The first word of each command in the replaced text is tested
for aliases, except when the command is the same one being aliased (to
avoid infinite looping). If the last character of the alias value is a
space character, the word following the alias is also checked for alias
substitution.
@*

Aliases cannot be used to redefine shell's reserved words. Aliases can
be created and listed using the @code{alias} command. They can be removed with
the unalias command.
@*

Aliasing is performed when scripts are read, not while they are executed.
The following aliases are defined by default by the shell, but
can be unset or redefined if the user wishes:

@example
 ls="ls --color=auto"
 ll="ls -la"
 l.="ls -d .* --color=auto"
 cd..="cd .."
 ".."="cd .."
 "..."="cd ../../../"
 grep="grep --color=auto"
 egrep="egrep --color=auto"
 fgrep="fgrep --color=auto"
 bc="bc -l"
 vi="vim"
 command="command "
 nohup="nohup "
 stop="kill -s STOP"
 suspend="kill -s STOP $$"
 hist="fc"
 typeset="declare"
 shopt="setx"
 reboot="sudo /sbin/reboot"
 poweroff="sudo /sbin/poweroff"
 halt="sudo /sbin/halt"
 shutdown="sudo /sbin/shutdown"
 df="df -H"
 du="du -ch"
 r="fc -s"
 memuse="memusage"
@end example

Some of the above aliases are defined by shells like bash and ksh,
while others are lsh-specific, included for convenience.


@section Tilde expansion
@cindex Tilde expansion

After alias substitution is performed, each word (or field) is checked
to see if it begins with an unquoted tilde @code{~}. If it does, the word up
to the first unquoted @code{/} is checked to see if it matches a user name
in the password database (this word is known as the tilde prefix). If a
match is found, the @code{~} and the matched user name (the tilde prefix)
are replaced by the login (or home) directory of the matched user
(POSIX). If no match is found, the original text is left unchanged. A
@code{~} by itself, or in front of a @code{/} with no intervening characters, is
replaced by the value of @code{$HOME} (POSIX). A @code{~} followed by a @code{+} or @code{-}
is replaced by the value of @code{$PWD} and @code{$OLDPWD}, respectively (non-POSIX
extension used by ksh and bash). A @code{~} followed by @code{~+N}, @code{~-N} or @code{~N}
is replaced by the corresponding directory stack entry, as if by calling
the @code{dirs} builtin with @code{+N}, @code{-N} or @code{N} (non-POSIX bash extension).
@*

Tilde expansion is also attempted during variable assignment if the
value of the assignment begins with a @code{~}, and when a @code{~} appears after
a colon @code{:}.


@section Command substitution
@cindex Command substitution

Command substitution occurs when commands are enclosed in parentheses
preceded by a dollar sign @code{$}, or when enclosed in a pair of back-
quotes or grave accents @code{`}. In the back-quoted form, the string
between quotes is processed for quoting characters before the command
is executed.
@*

The special command substitution @code{$(cat file)} can be replaced by the
equivalent but faster @code{$(<file)} (non-POSIX ksh and bash extension). The
command substitution @code{$(n<#)} expands to the current byte offset for file
descriptor @code{n} (non-POSIX ksh extension).


@node Arithmetic expansion
@section Arithmetic expansion
@cindex Arithmetic expansion

Arithmetic expressions are enclosed in double parentheses preceded by a
dollar sign, in the form of:

@example
$(( arithmetic-expression ))
@end example

Arithmetic expressions can also be written without the preceding dollar
sign (non-POSIX extension):

@example
(( arithmetic-expression ))
@end example

Arithmetic expressions are processed and replaced by the value of the
expression inside the parentheses.
@*

Arithmetic valuations are performed using long integer arithmetic, the only
format required by POSIX, although other shells (e.g. bash and ksh) perform
double or long double precision arithmetic. Numeric constants can be of the
form @code{[base#]n}, where @code{base} is a decimal number between 2 and 36
(ksh and bash allow bases up to 64) representing the arithmetic base. @code{n}
is a number in the given base. Digits greater than 9 are represented by
lowercase or uppercase letters.
@*

Only the basic arithmetic operations are currently supported in Layla shell.
Specifically, floating point arithmetic and braced expressions are not
supported. Also, the use of mathmetical functions (including @code{pow()} for
exponentiation) is not supported.


@section Process substitution
@cindex Process substitution

ksh, bash and other shells support process substitution on some UNIX
operating systems that support the @file{/dev/fd} directory scheme for naming
open files. Layla shell currently doesn't support process substitution.


@section Parameter expansion
@cindex Parameter expansion

A parameter can be a variable name, one or more digits, or any of the
special characters @code{*}, @code{@@}, @code{#}, @code{?}, @code{-},
@code{$}, and @code{!}. A variable is
denoted by a name, which consists of alphanumeric characters and @code{_},
and must begin with an alphabetic character or @code{_}. Exported variables
are passed in the environment to child processes. Layla shell currently
doesn't support indexed or associative arrays, or nameref variables.
@*

The value of a variable can be assigned by:

@example
name=value [name=value] ...
@end example

No space is allowed before or after the @code{=}. Positional parameters cannot
be assigned in this way; they must be set using the @code{set} or @code{shift}
special builtin utilities. Parameter @code{$0} is set from argument zero
(@code{argv[0]}) when the shell is invoked. The character @code{$} is used to
indi cate parameter expansion, which can be of the following formats:

@heading $@{parameter@}
The parameter name contains all characters from @code{$@{} to the matching
@code{@}}. The parameter's value, if any, is substituted. The braces are
required when parameter is followed by a letter, digit, or underscore
that is not part of the parameter name. If @code{parameter} is one or more
digits this indicates a positional parameter. A positional parameter of
more than one digit must be enclosed in braces. If @code{parameter} is @code{*} or
@code{@@}, all the positional parameters (starting with @code{$1}) are substituted
and separated by a field separator character.

@heading $@{#parameter@}
If @code{parameter} is @code{*} or @code{@@}, the number of positional parameters is
substituted. Otherwise, the length of parameter's value is substituted.

@heading $@{!prefix*@}
Expands to the names of the variables whose names begin with @code{prefix}
(non-POSIX extension).

@heading $@{parameter:-word@}
If @code{parameter} is set and is non-null, its value is substituted.
Otherwise @code{word} is substituted. @code{word} is not evaluated unless it
is to be used as the substituted string. If the colon is omitted, the shell only
checks whether @code{parameter} is set or not.

@heading $@{parameter:offset:length@}
@heading $@{parameter:offset@}
Expands to the portion of the value of @code{parameter} starting at the
character number resulting from the expansion of the @code{offset} arithmetic
expression (counting from zero), and consisting of the number of characters
resulting form the expansion of the @code{length} arithmetic expression.
In the second form, all chacaters till the end of the value are
used. A negative @code{offset} counts backwards from the end, and one or more
spaces are required before minus sign to prevent the shell from interpreting
the operator as @code{:-}. If @code{parameter} is @code{*} or @code{@@}, @code{offset} and
@code{length} refer to the array index and number of elements respectively. A
negative @code{offset} is taken relative to the number of elements in the
array. This format is a non-POSIX extension.

@heading $@{parameter#pattern@}
@heading $@{parameter##pattern@}
If @code{pattern} matches the beginning (prefix) of the value of @code{parameter},
the value substituted is the value of @code{parameter} with the matched
portion deleted. Otherwise the value of @code{parameter} is substituted. In the
first form the shortest matching @code{pattern} is deleted and in the second
form the longest matching @code{pattern} is deleted (POSIX). When parameter is
@code{@@} or @code{*} the substring operation is applied to each element in
turn (non-POSIX ksh and bash extension).

@heading $@{parameter%pattern@}
@heading $@{parameter%%pattern@}
If @code{pattern} matches the ending (suffix) of the value of @code{parameter}, the
value substituted is the value of @code{parameter} with the matched portion
deleted. Otherwise the value of @code{parameter} is substituted. In the first
form the shortest matching @code{pattern} is deleted and in the second form
the longest matching @code{pattern} is deleted (POSIX). When @code{parameter} is
@code{@@} or @code{*} the substring operation is applied to each element in
turn (non-POSIX ksh and bash extension).

@heading $@{parameter/pattern/string@}
@heading $@{parameter//pattern/string@}
@heading $@{parameter/#pattern/string@}
@heading $@{parameter/%pattern/string@}

These are non-POSIX extensions and are not currently implemented in the
Layla shell.


@section Field splitting
@cindex Field splitting

After parameter expansion and command substitution, the results are
scanned for the field separator characters (as indicated by @code{$IFS}) and
split into separate fields. Explicit null fields (those passed as "" or
'') are retained. Implicit null fields resulting from parameters with
no values or command substitutions with no output are removed.
@*

If the @code{braceexpand} or @code{-B} option is set, the fields are checked for
brace patterns, such as @code{@{*,*@}}, @code{@{l1..l2@}}, and @code{@{n1..n2@}},
where @code{*} means any character; @code{l1} and @code{l2} are letters and
@code{n1} and @code{n2} are signed
numbers. Fields are generated by prepending the characters before the
opening brace and appending the characters after the closing brace to
each of the strings generated by the characters between the braces.


@section Pathname expansion
@cindex Pathname expansion

This is also known as File Name Generation.
@*

Following field splitting, each field is scanned for the regular
expression (regex) characters @code{*}, @code{?}, and @code{[} (unless the
@code{noglob} or @code{-f} option is set. If the field contains a regex character, it is
treated as a pattern.
@*

Pathnames containing pattern characters are replaced with sets of names
that matches the pattern. If no pathname is found that matches the pattern,
that pathname is left unchanged. If @code{$FIGNORE} is set, each pathname
that matches the pattern defined by the value of @code{$FIGNORE} is
ignored when generating the list. The names @code{.} and @code{..} are also
ignored.
@*

The following is what the pattern characters mean inside pattern strings:
@table @code
@item *
Match any string including the null string.
@item ?
Match any single character.
@item [...]
Match any one of the enclosed characters. Two characters separated by
@code{-} matches any character lexically between the pair,
inclusive. If the first character is a bang @code{!}, any character
not enclosed is matched. A @code{-} can be included in the character
set by putting it as the first or last character. Character
classes can be specified with the syntax @code{[:class:]} where class
is one of the following ANSI-C classes: @code{alnum alpha blank cntrl
digit graph lower print punct space upper word xdigit}.
@end table


@node Quoting
@section Quoting
@cindex Quoting

Quoting can be used to remove the special meaning of the shell's
metacharacters, which include:

@example
; & ( ) | < > newline space tab
@end example

Metacharacters are used to delimit tokens, in addition to their special
meaning to the shell. If a character is quoted, that is, preceded with
a backslash @code{\}, it is quoted and loses its special meaning to the
shell. The pair @code{\newline} is removed from input. All characters enclosed
between single quotes are considered to be quoted. Single quotes cannot
appear within single quotes. A single quoted string preceded by an
unquoted dollar sign @code{$} is processed as an ANSI-C string. Parameter
expansion and command substitution does not occur inside single quotes.
@*

Inside double quotes, parameter and command substitution occur and @code{\}
quotes the characters @code{\}, @code{'}, @code{`}, @code{"}, and @code{$}.
If a @code{$} is found in front of a double quoted string, ksh and bash
translate the string by a locale-specific message, but our shell currently
ignores the dollar sign.
@*

The shell variables @code{$*} and @code{$@@} are identical when not quoted.
However, @code{"$*"} is equivalent to @code{"$1c$2c..."}, where @code{c} is
the first character of the @code{$IFS} variable, whereas @code{"$@@"} is
equivalent to @code{"$1" "$2"}.
@*

Inside back-quotes (grave accents), @code{\} quotes the characters @code{\},
@code{`}, and @code{$}.
@*

The special meaning of reserved words (keywords) and aliases can be
removed by quoting any character of the reserved word or alias.


@node Shell Variables and Parameters
@chapter Shell Variables and Parameters
@cindex Shell Variables and Parameters

@section Special parameters
@cindex Special parameters

The following special parameters are automatically set by the shell.
They are all defined by POSIX, except when it says otherwise.

@table @code
@item @@
The positional parameters, starting from 1, producing separate
fields for each parameter If expansion occurs inside double
quotes, each parameter expands to a separate field
@item *
The positional parameters, starting from 1, producing separate
fields for each parameter If expansion occurs inside double
quotes, parameters are joined to form a single field
@item #
The decimal number of positional parameters, not counting parameter 0
or @code{$0}.
@item -
Options supplied to the shell on invocation or by calling the
@code{set} command.
@item ?
The decimal value returned by the last executed command.
@item $
The process identifier (PID) of this shell.
@item _
Initially, the value of @code{_} is the absolute pathname of the
shell or script being executed (as passed in the environment at
startup). It is subsequently assigned the last argument of the
previous command (bash and ksh, while csh assigns the full command
line of the last command). This parameter is not set for
asynchronous (background) commands. It also holds the name of
the matching @code{$MAIL} file when checking for mail. This parameter
is a non-POSIX extension.
@item !
The PID of the last run background pipeline, or the most recent
job put in the background with the bg builtin utility.
@item 0
The name of this shell or script.
@end table


@node Shell Variables
@section Shell variables
@cindex Shell variables

Shell variables are initialized from the environment at startup. During
the shell's lifetime, shell variables can have their values reassigned
or unset through variable assignment. The following are the variables
used by the shell. They are all defined by POSIX, except when it says
otherwise.

@table @code
@item COMMAND
 Similar to bash's @code{$BASH_COMMAND} variable, this variable contains
the full command line of the currently executing command. This
variable is a non-POSIX extension.
@item COMMAND_STRING
Similar to bash's @code{$BASH_EXECUTION_STRING} variable, this variable
contains the value of the command string passed to the shell
with the @code{-c} option. This variable is a non-POSIX extension.
@item CDPATH
This variable defines the search path for the @code{cd} builtin.
@item COLUMNS
This variable defines the width of the shell's window for printing
@code{select} lists and the results of tab completions.
@item COPROC0
The file descriptor of the file holding the coprocess's output,
created by the @code{coproc} builtin utility. This variable is similar
to bash's @code{$COPROC[0]}, which is an array variable.
@item COPROC1
The file descriptor of the file holding the coprocess's input,
created by the @code{coproc} builtin utility. This variable is similar
to bash's @code{$COPROC[1]}, which is an array variable.
@item DIRSFILE
Similar to tcsh's @code{$dirsfile} variable, this variable contains the
pathname of the file used to save and restore the directory
stack. This variable is a non-POSIX extension. See also
@code{$SAVEDIRS}.
@item DIRSTACK
The contents of the directory stack in the order displayed by
the @code{dirs} builtin. Assignments to this variable change the contents
of the directory stack. This variable is a non-POSIX bash
extension. It is similar to tcsh's @code{dirstack} variable.
@item EDITOR
If the @code{$VISUAL} variable is not set, the value of @code{$EDITOR} is
processed and the corresponding editing mode is turned on (only the
@code{vi} editing mode is currently supported). This variable is also
used by the @code{fc} builtin to determine the editor program to use
for editing history commands. This variable is a non-POSIX
extension. The default value is @code{vi}.
@item EGID
The effective group id of the current user. This variable is a
non-POSIX extension.
@item ENV
Parameter expansion, command substitution, and arithmetic expansion
are performed on the value of this variable to generate the
pathname of the script that is executed when the shell is
invoked. This file is typically used for alias and function definitions.
The default value is @file{$HOME/.lshrc}.
@item EPOCHREALTIME
The number of seconds (in floating point format) since Unix
epoch. This variable is a non-POSIX bash extension.
@item EPOCHSECONDS
The number of seconds (in long integer format) since Unix epoch.
This variable is a non-POSIX bash extension.
@item EUID
The effective user id of the current user. This variable is a
non-POSIX bash extension.
@item EXECIGNORE
This is a colon-separated list of patterns of executable file
names to ignore when the shell is searching for executable
files. This variable is a non-POSIX bash extension.
@item FCEDIT
The default editor name for the @code{fc} command. @code{$FCEDIT}
takes precedence over @code{$HISTEDIT}, which in turn takes precedence
over @code{$EDITOR}. The default value for @code{$FCEDIT} is @code{vi}.
@item FIGNORE
 pattern that defines the set of file names that is ignored
when performing file name matching. This variable is a non-POSIX
ksh extension.
@item FUNCNAME
The name of the currently executing function. The value is
@code{main} if there is no function currently executing. This
variable is similar to bash's @code{$FUNCNAME}, except that the latter is
an array variable containing the names of all functions in the
call stack. This variable is a non-POSIX bash extension.
@item FUNCNEST
The maximum function nesting level. Function calls cannot exceed
this value, if it is set. This variable is a non-POSIX bash
extension.
@item GID
The numeric group id of the currently logged user. This variable
is a non-POSIX extension.
@item GLOBIGNORE
A colon-separated list of patterns that define the set of file
names to be ignored when performing file name (i.e. pathname)
expansion. This variable is a non-POSIX bash extension.
@item GROUPS
The list of groups of which the current user is a member. This
variable is similar to bash's @code{$GROUPS}, except that the latter is
an array variable containing the group names. This variable is a
non-POSIX bash extension.
@item HISTCMD
The number of the current command in the history file. This
variable is a non-POSIX extension used by ksh and bash.
@item HISTCONTROL
A colon-separated list that controls how history entries are
saved in the history file. The values of this list can be:

@itemize
@item @strong{ignorespace}: Don't save lines starting with a space.
@item @strong{ignoredups}: Don't save lines matching the previous history entry.
@item @strong{ignoreboth}: Shorthand for ignorespace and ignoredups.
@item @strong{erasedups}: Remove duplicate lines matching the current one.
@end itemize

This variable is a non-POSIX bash extension.

@item HISTFILE
The pathname of the file that is used to store the command history.
@item HISTFILESIZE
The maximum number of commands to save in the history file. This
variable is a non-POSIX bash extension.
@item HISTIGNORE
A colon-separated list that tells the shell which commands to
ignore when saving the history list. Patterns are matched
against the history line to be saved. If they match, the line is
not saved in the history list. This variable is a non-POSIX bash
extension.
@item HISTSIZE
The number of previously entered commands that are accessible by
this shell. The default is 512.
@item HISTTIMEFORMAT
If set and not null, the value of this variable is the format
string passed to @code{strftime()} in order to print the timestamp of
history entries, which is output by the builtin history utility.
This variable is a non-POSIX bash extension.
@item HISTEDIT
The name for the default editor name for the fc command. This
variable is a non-POSIX ksh extension. It takes precedence over
@code{$EDITOR}.
@item HOME
The default argument for the cd builtin (the home directory).
The value of @code{$HOME} is typically set by login.
@item HOST
@item HOSTNAME
The name of the current host. Both variables are non-POSIX
extensions.
@item HOSTFILE
The name of the file the shell reads when performing hostname
completion. If this variable is null or not set, the default
file @file{/etc/hosts} is used. This variable is a non-POSIX bash
extension.
@item HOSTTYPE
The type of machine the shell is running on, determined at compilation
time. Similar to @code{$MACHTYPE}. This variable is a non-POSIX
bash extension.
@item IGNOREEOF
If set, indicates the count of consecutive EOFs the shell must
read before exiting. If not set or null, the default is 10 (same
as bash). This variable is only of use to interactive shell.
This variable is a non-POSIX bash extension.
@item IFS
Internal field separators, which default to space, tab, and newline.
Used to separate the results of command substitution or
parameter expansion and to separate fields when using the read
builtin utility. The first character of the @code{$IFS} variable is
used to separate arguments for the @code{"$*"} substitution. See the
@xref{Quoting} section. The default value is " \t\n".
@item INSERTMODE
The insert mode for the command line editor. If set to @code{overwrite},
the editor overwrites characters in the command line buffer (as if the
@key{INSERT} key was pressed. Any other value, including @code{insert},
puts the editor in the regular mode, where characters are added without
overwriting existing characters. This is a non-POSIX extension that
behaves like tcsh's @code{inputmode} variable.
@item LANG
The locale category for any category not specifically selected
with a variable starting with @code{LC_} or @code{LANG}. Not currently used by
the shell.
@item LC_ALL
Overrides the value of the @code{LANG} variable and any other @code{LC_}
variable. Not currently used by the shell.
@item LC_COLLATE
The locale category for character collation information. Not
currently used by the shell.
@item LC_CTYPE
The locale category for character handling functions. Not currently
used by the shell.
@item LC_NUMERIC
The locale category for the decimal point character. Not currently
used by the shell.
@item LINES
The number of lines in the shell's window.
@item LINENO
The current line number within the script or function being executed.
@item MACHTYPE
The type of machine the shell is running on, determined at compilation
time. Similar to @code{$HOSTTYPE}. This variable is a non-POSIX extension.
@item MAIL
The name of the mail file to check if @code{$MAILPATH} is not set.
@code{$MAIL} is not set by the shell.
@item MAILCHECK
The interval (in seconds) after which the shell checks for
changes in the modification time (mtime) of any of the files
specified in the @code{$MAILPATH} or @code{$MAIL} variables. The default value
is 600 seconds (ksh) or 60 seconds (bash). We use the ksh value.
When the time has elapsed the shell checks for mail before outputting
the next primary prompt.
@item MAILPATH
A colon-separated list of file names to check after @code{$MAILCHECK}
seconds has elapsed. Each file name can be followed by a @code{?} and
a message that is printed if the file is modified. The message
undergoes parameter expansion, command substitution, and arithmetic
expansion and the @code{$_} variable contains the name of the
file that has changed. The default message is @strong{"you have mail in
$_"} (ksh).
@item OLDPWD
The previous working directory set by the @code{cd} builtin.
@item OPTARG
The value of the last option argument processed by the @code{getopts}
builtin utility.
@item OPTIND
The index of the last option argument processed by the @code{getopts}
builtin utility.
@item OPTERR
If set to 1, display errors generated by the @code{getopts} builtin.
This variable is a non-POSIX bash extension.
@item OSTYPE
The type of operating system the shell is running on, determined
at compilation time. This variable is a non-POSIX extension.
@item PATH
The search path for commands. @code{$PATH} cannot be changed if the
shell is in the restricted mode. The default value is
@code{"/bin:/usr/bin:/sbin:/usr/sbin"}.
@item PPID
The PID of the parent of this shell.
@item PROMPT_COMMAND
If set, the value is a command to be executed before printing
the primary prompt @code{$PS1}. This variable is a non-POSIX bash
extension.
@item PROMPTCHARS
If set to a two-character string, this variable is used when printing
prompt strings. The first character is used for normal users, the second
character is used for root. The default value is @code{"$#"}. This is a
non-POSIX extension that behaves like tcsh's @code{promptchars} variable.
@item PS0
The value of this variable is expanded for parameter expansion,
command substitution, and arithmetic expansion and the result
printed on stderr, right before each simple command is executed.
This variable is a non-POSIX bash extension.
@item PS1
The primary prompt string. The value of this variable is
expanded for parameter expansion, command substitution, and
arithmetic expansion. The character @code{!} in @code{$PS1} is replaced by
the history number of the current command. Two bangs produce a single @code{!}
when the prompt string is printed. The default value is @code{"[\u \W]\$\ "}.
@item PS2
The secondary prompt string, defaults to @code{"> "}.
@item PS3
The third (selection) prompt string used within a @code{select} loop,
defaults to @code{"#? "}.
@item PS4
The value of this variable is expanded for parameter evaluation,
command substitution, and arithmetic expansion and precedes each
line of an execution trace. The default value is @code{"+ "}.
@item PWD
The present (current) working directory set by the @code{cd} builtin.
@item RANDOM
Each time this variable is referenced, a random integer number,
uniformly distributed between 0 and 32767, is returned. The
sequence of random numbers can be initialized by assigning a
numeric value to @code{$RANDOM}. This variable is a non-POSIX extension.
@item REPLY
This variable is set by the select statement and by the read
builtin utility when no arguments are passed to it. This variable
is a non-POSIX extension.
@item SAVEDIRS
If set, this variable means a login shell must save the directory
stack in the file indicated by the value of @code{$DIRSFILE}. This
variable is similar to tcsh's @code{$savedirs} variable. This variable
is a non-POSIX extension.
@item SECONDS
Each time this variable is referenced, the number of seconds
since the shell started is returned. If this variable is
assigned a value, the value returned is the value that was
assigned plus the number of seconds since the assignment. This
variable is a non-POSIX extension.
@item SHELL
The full pathname of the shell. Upon startup, if the basename of
this variable is @code{rsh}, @code{rlsh}, or @code{lrsh}, the shell becomes
restricted. @code{$SHELL} is not typically set by the shell.
@item SHELLOPTS
A colon-separated list of enabled shell options, the ones that
are reported as on when invoking @code{set -o}. If this variable is set
on shell startup, each option is enabled in the shell. This
variable is a readonly non-POSIX bash extension.
@item SHLVL
This variable is assigned the value of 1 the first time the
shell is run. Its value gets incremented by 1, each time a new
instance of the shell is started. This variable is a readonly
non-POSIX bash extension (although bash doesn't mark it as readonly).
@item SUBSHELL
This variable is incremented by 1 in each subshell the shell
invokes. This variable is a non-POSIX extension.
@item TIMEFORMAT
The format string specifying how the timing information for
pipelines prefixed with the time command should be displayed.
The possible format sequences are:

@table @code
@item %%
A literal %.
@item %[p][l]R
The elapsed (real) time in seconds.
@item %[p][l]U
The number of CPU seconds spent in user mode.
@item %[p][l]S
The number of CPU seconds spent in system mode.
@item %P
The CPU usage percentage, computed as (U + S) / R.
@end table

In all the above format sequences, braces denote optional portions.
The optional @code{p} is a digit specifying the precision, i.e.
the number of fractional digits after a decimal point. A value
of 0 means no decimal point or fraction is to be output. A maximum
of three places after the decimal point can be displayed. If
@code{p} is greater than 3 or is not specified, it is treated as 3. The
optional @code{l} (ell) specifies a longer format which includes hours,
minutes, and seconds of the form @code{HHhMMmSS.FFs}. The value of @code{l}
determines whether or not the fraction @code{.FF} is included. All
other characters are output without change, and a trailing newline
is added afterwards. If @code{$TIMEFORMAT} is unset, the default
value is @code{"\nreal\t%2lR\nuser\t%2lU\nsys\t%2lS"} (ksh and bash,
except that bash uses a precision of 3 instead of 2). If the
value of @code{$TIMEFORMAT} is null, no timing information is displayed.

@item TMPDIR
The pathname of the directory used to create temporary files. If
not set, the default is @file{/tmp}. This variable is a non-POSIX bash
extension.
@item TMOUT
The default time-out value for the read and select builtin utilities.
The shell terminates if a line is not entered within the
prescribed number of seconds while reading from a terminal. This
variable is a non-POSIX extension used by ksh and bash.
@item UID
The numeric user id of the currently logged user. This variable
is a non-POSIX extension.
@item USER
The username of the currently logged user. This variable is a
non-POSIX extension.
@item VISUAL
If the value of this variable matches the pattern @code{*[Vv][Ii]*},
the @code{vi} option is turned on. Currently, no other patterns are
recognized by the Layla shell. The value of @code{$VISUAL} overrides
the value of @code{$EDITOR}.
@end table



@node The Execution Environment
@chapter The Execution Environment
@cindex The Execution Environment


@section Shell Invocation
@cindex Shell Invocation

If upon invocation, the first character of argument zero is a hyphen
@code{-}, the shell is a login shell and commands are read from @file{/etc/profile}
and then from @file{.profile} in the current working directory or, if this
file is not found, from @file{$HOME/.profile}.
@*

Interactive shells read @file{/etc/lshrc}, followed by the file named by the
result of parameter expansion, command substitution, and arithmetic
expansion of the value of the environment variable @code{$ENV} if the file
exists and is readable. If the @code{-s} option is not supplied and an argument
is given which is an existing file, the shell reads and executes
that file as a shell script.
@*

Commands are then read and executed. The following options are recognized
by the shell upon startup:

@table @code
@item -c
If this option is supplied, commands are read from the first
argument after the @code{-c} option. Any remaining arguments become
positional parameters, starting from argument number 0.
@item -i
If this option is supplied, or if the shell's stdin and stderr
are attached to a terminal device (as indicated by @code{isatty()}),
this shell is interactive. Interactive shells ignore the @code{TERM}
signal (so that @code{kill 0} does not kill an interactive shell).
@code{INTR} is caught and ignored (so that @code{wait} is interruptible).
@code{QUIT} is always ignored by the shell.
@item -r
If this option is supplied, the shell becomes a restricted shell.
@item -s
If this option is supplied, or if no arguments remain, commands
are read from stdin.
@end table

The remaining options and arguments are recognized as described for the
@code{set} builtin utility.


@section The restricted shell
@cindex The restricted shell

The restricted shell is used to set up and execution environment more
controlled than that of the standard shell. The restricted shell
behaves similar to the normal shell, except that the following actions
are not permitted:

@itemize
@item Unsetting the restricted option
@item Changing directory using @code{cd}
@item Setting or unsetting the value or attributes of @code{$SHELL}, @code{$ENV} or @code{$PATH}
@item Specifying paths or command names containing @code{/}
@item Redirecting output using @code{>}, @code{>|}, @code{<>}, or @code{>>}
@item Using @code{command -p} to invoke a command
@end itemize


@section Exit status
@cindex Exit status

The shell's exit status can be one of:

@table @strong
@item non-zero
Returned when errors, such as syntax errors, are detected by the
shell. Non-interactive shells exit in this case.
@item zero
If no commands were executed.
@item Other values
The exit status of last command executed is returned on exit.
@end table


@section Input and Output
@cindex Input and Output

Command input and output can be redirected using special shell constructs,
which can precede or follow the command name, and which are
not passed to the invoked command. Command substitution, parameter
expansion, and arithmetic expansion occur and the result is used for
redirecting input and output streams as appropriate. Field splitting is
not performed on the results of expansion. If the redirected file is of
the form @file{/dev/tcp/host/port} or @file{/dev/udp/host/port}, the shell attempts
to make a tcp or udp connection to the corresponding host and port number.
No intervening space is allowed between the redirection operator
and its operands.
@*

@table @code
@item <word
Redirect stdin to read from the file indicated by @code{word}.
@item >word
Redirect stdout to read from the file indicated by @code{word}. If the
file does not exist then it is created. If the file exists and
the @code{noclobber} '@code{-C}' option is set, an error results. Otherwise,
the file is truncated to zero length.
@item >|word
Similar to @code{>}, except that it overrides the @code{noclobber} '@code{-C}'
option.
@item >>word
Redirect output to the file indicated by @code{word}. If the file
exists, append output to the end-of-file. Otherwise, create the
file.
@item <>word
Open the file indicated by @code{word} for read/write on stdin.
@item <<[-]word
Redirect stdin to read from a here-document. The shell reads up
to the line that contains @code{word} after any quoting has been
removed. No parameter substitution, command substitution, arithmetic
expansion or pathname expansion is performed on @code{word}. The
resulting document (the here-document), becomes the input. If
any character of @code{word} is quoted, no expansion is done on the
document. Otherwise, parameter expansion, command substitution,
and arithmetic expansion occur, the @code{\newline} sequence is
ignored, and @code{\} must be used to quote the characters @code{\}, @code{$},
and @code{`}. If @code{-} is appended to the @code{<<} operator, all leading
tabs are stripped from the document.
@item <<<word
Redirect stdin to read from a here-string. @code{word} becomes the contents
of the here-document after parameter expansion, command
substitution, and arithmetic expansion is performed.
@item <&digit
Duplicate stdin to read from file descriptor @code{digit}.
@item >&digit
Duplicate stdout to write to file descriptor @code{digit}.
@item <&digit-
Move file descriptor @code{digit} to stdin (i.e. duplicate and close
the file descriptor).
@item >&digit-
Move file descriptor @code{digit} to stdout (i.e. duplicate and close
the file descriptor).
@item <&-
Close stdin.
@item >&-
Close stdout.
@item <&p
Redirect stdin to read from the co-process start by the @code{coproc} builtin.
@item >&p
Redirect stdout to come from the co-process start by the @code{coproc} builtin.
@item <#((expr))
Evaluate arithmetic expression @code{expr} and move file descriptor 0's
(stdin) offset to the resulting bytes from the start of the file.
@item >#((expr))
The same as @code{<#} for file descriptor 1 (stdout).
@end table

If a redirection operator is preceded by a digit, the file descriptor
to be redirected is that referred to by the digit (instead of the
default 0 or 1). If a redirection operator is preceded by @code{@{varname@}}
with no intervening spaces, a file descriptor greater than 10 is
selected by the shell and stored in the variable named varname.


@section The environment
@cindex The environment

The environment is a list of name-value string pairs that is passed
down to commands when they are being executed. On startup, the shell
scans the environment and creates a shell variable for each entry, giving
it the corresponding value and marking it for export. Commands executed
by the shell inherit the environment list. If the user modifies
the values of these variables or creates new ones by using the @code{export}
builtin utility, these new variables become part of the environment.
Variable assignments occurring before the command name are added to the
command's environment, while those occuring after the command name are
only considered if the @code{keyword} '@code{-k}' option is set.


@section The shell prompt
@cindex The shell prompt

When running interactively, the shell prompts the user by prinintg the
value of @code{$PS1} to stderr after expanding it for parameter expansion,
command substitution, and arithmetic expansion, before reading the next
command. Each command is not considered complete, the secondary prompt
@code{$PS2} is expanded and printed to stderr.


@node Jobs
@section Jobs
@cindex Jobs

If the @code{monitor} '@code{-m}' option is set, an interactive shell associates a
job with each pipeline. The shell keeps a table of current jobs, each
one being assigned a small integer number. When a job is started
asynchronously (in the background) by affixing it with @code{&}, the shell
prints a line that looks like:

@example
 [1] 12345
@end example

which indicates that a job was started asynchronously with job number
1, and that the last process in the pipeline had a @code{PID} of 12345.
@*

To suspend a running job, press @code{CTRL-Z} to send the @code{STOP} signal to the
current job. The shell displays a message informing your of the change
in the job's status before printing the primary prompt. The job can
then be run in the background or foreground by invoking the @code{bg} and @code{fg}
builtins, respectively.
@*

If a background job tries to read from the terminal, it is sent the
@code{SIGTTIN} signal, which suspends the job by default. Background jobs can
usually send output to the terminal, unless the stty was used to modify
this behavior, in which case the job is sent a @code{SIGTTOU} signal when it
tries to write to the terminal.
@*

Jobs are referred to by using the @code{PID} of any process in the job, or by
the job id which can take the following formats:

@table @code
@item %number
The job with the given number.
@item %string
Any job whose command line begins with string.
@item %?string
Any job whose command line contains string.
@item %%
The current job.
@item %+
The current job. Equivalent to %%.
@item %-
The previous job.
@end table

When a process changes state, the shell is sent a @code{CHLD} signal. The
shell outputs the list of stopped jobs right before outputting the next
primary string. If the @code{notify} '@code{-b}' option is set, the shell notifies
the user of any change in job's status immediately. When a background
job finishes and the @code{monitor} '@code{-m}' option is set, the shell executes any
set @code{CHLD} traps.
@*

When the user tries to exit an interactive shell while there are running
or stopped jobs, the shell prints a warning message. If another
attempt is made at exit, the jobs are sent a @code{HUP} signal before the
shell exits. When a login shell receives a @code{HUP} signal, it re-sends the
@code{HUP} signal to all job that have not been disowned with the @code{disown}
builtin utility.


@section Signals
@cindex Signals

The interactive shell ignores the @code{TERM} and @code{QUIT} signals.
If the @code{monitor} '@code{-m}' option is set, the @code{TSTP}, @code{TTIN},
and @code{TTOU} signals are also ignored. The @code{CHILD}, @code{INT},
@code{WINCH} and @code{HUP} signals are caught and handled.
@*

For background (asynchronous) pipelines, the @code{INT} and @code{QUIT} signals are
ignored if the @code{monitor} '@code{-m}' option is not active. In all other cases,
signals have the values inherited by the shell from its parent upon startup.


@section Command execution
@cindex Command execution

Commands that doesn't contain slashes are looked up. If the command
name matches the name of a special builtin utility, the utility is executed
in the current shell. If not, the command name is checked against
user-defined functions. If it matches a defined function, positional
parameters are saved and then reset, before assigning them to the arguments
passed as part of the function call. Functions are also executed
in the current shell. Positional parameters are restored when the
function returns. The exit status of a function call is the value of
the last command executed in the function. If a command name is neither
a special builtin utility nor a user-defined function, the shell
looks for a regular builtin utility with the given name. If found, the
regular builtin utility is executed in the current shell.
@*

If all the above fails, the shell looks for commands external to the
shell's executable. The shell variable @code{$PATH} defines the search path
which the shell uses to look for a directory containing the command. It
consists of a colon-separated list of directory names. The default path
defined by Layla shell is @code{"/usr/local/bin:/usr/local/sbin:/usr/bin:/usr/sbin"}.
Each directory in the path is searched for an executable file with the given name. If
found, a subshell is forked and the command is executed by calling @code{exec()}.
@*

One of the distinctive features of lsh's commandline interpreter is that it
performs two passes on the input source (whether it was an interactively-entered
command, a script file, or a command string). The first pass is in the frontend (the
parser), which tokenizes input and forms an abstract source tree (AST) out of it.
The second pass is in the backend (the executor), which executes the AST.
That two-tiered (or two pass) layout simplifies the process of reading and executing
commands within the shell, but it also has some side effects. One of these side effects
is that syntax errors in a shell script will result in the shell refraining from
executing the whole script. Another side effect is that functions can be defined
anywhere in the script, and they can be called before they are defined (provided the
definition occurs in the same script file). So for example, the following script will
raise an error in bash, but not in lsh:

@example
# the following line will execute successfully in lsh, but not in bash
f1

# function definition can follow function call in the same script file
f1 ()
@{
   echo "Inside f1"
@}
@end example

Another side effect is that empty function bodies are permissible in lsh, while they
are not so in bash. For example, in the following script, @code{echo} will be executed
in lsh, while it a syntax error will result in bash:

@example
empty ()
@{
@}

echo "Hi there!"
@end example

A third side effect is that function nesting is permissible in lsh, which is also the case
in bash. The difference here is that because lsh parses the whole script before passing
it to the executor, a nested function is recognized and added to the function table at the
time its parent function is parsed. This doesn't mean that either of the two functions is being
processed or its commands executed; just the function names are added to the global function
table. Again, this is not the case in bash.

For example, in the following script, both f1 and f2 are added to the function table by the
time the parser finishes with the script. This is why the three function calls will work
properly in lsh, while in bash the first call to f2 will result in a "command not found..." error;
the second call to f2 and the call to f1 will both work, as the call to f1 resulted in the
addition of f2 to the function table:

@example
f1 ()
@{
    f2 ()
    @{
        echo "function f1"
    @}
@}

f2    # results in "command not found..." error in bash, but not lsh
f1    # works in both bash and lsh
f2    # works in both bash and lsh
@end example



@node Command History and Editing
@chapter Command History and Editing
@cindex Command History and Editing


@section Command history
@cindex Command history

The last @code{$HISTSIZE} (which defaults to 512) commands entered in an
interactive shell is saved in the history file, whose path is given by
@code{$HISTFILE}. If @code{$HISTFILE} is unset of null, or the file is not writeable
by the shell, @file{$HOME/.lsh_history} is used instead.
@*

The builtin utility @code{history} can be used to list the history entries,
while the builtin @code{fc} can be used to edit the list. When calling @code{fc} to
edit history commands, the @code{-e} option can be used to specify the editor
program to pass the history list to. If no editor is specified, @code{fc}
consults the @code{$FCEDIT} variable and invokes the command named in the value
of this variable. If @code{$FCEDIT} is not set, @code{$HISTEDIT} is consulted. If
this is also not set, @code{$EDITOR} is consulted. If all of this fails, the
default value @file{/bin/ed} is used. The edited commands are printed and
executed upon leaving the editor. The @code{-s} option causes @code{fc} to skip the
editing phase and to re-execute the commands directly.


@section Vi editing mode
@cindex Vi editing mode

The Layla shell provides builtin @code{vi} editing functionality. There are
two default modes. When the shell starts, the user is placed in the
@strong{input mode}. To edit commands, the user must press @key{ESC} (ASCII 033) to
enter the @strong{control mode}. Most control commands accept an optional repeat
count that is entered before the command character.

@heading The Input Mode
The default editor mode is the @strong{input mode}. The following edit commands
are supported in this mode:

@table @key
@item ERASE
The default is @key{^H} or @key{Backspace}. Deletes the previous character.
@item ^W
Deletes the previous blank-separated word.
@item EOF
If the first character in the line, it causes the shell to terminate,
unless the @code{ignoreeof} option is set, or the @code{$IGNOREEOF}
variable is set to a numeric value greater than zero.
@item ^V
Removes the next character's editing features, if any.
@item \
Escape the next @code{ERASE} or @code{KILL} character.
@item ^I, TAB
Attempts command, variable, username, hostname, or filename completion.
@end table

@heading The Control Mode
When the user presses @key{ESC} and the @code{vi} option is set, the shell's editor
enters the control mode. The following commands are recognized in this mode.

@subheading Motion Edit Commands

@table @code
@item [count]l
Move the cursor one character forward (to the right).
@item [count][C
Move the cursor one character forward (to the right).
@item [count]w
Move the cursor one word forward.
@item [count]W
Move the cursor to the beginning of the next word following a blank.
@item [count]e
Move the cursor to the end of this word.
@item [count]E
Move the cursor to the end of the current blank-delimited word.
@item [count]h
Move the cursor one character backwards (to the left).
@item [count][D
Move the cursor one character backwards (to the left).
@item [count]b
Move the cursor one word backwards.
@item [count]B
Move the cursor to the preceding blank-separated word.
@item [count]|
Move the cursor to column number count.
@item [count]fc
Find the next character c in the current line.
@item [count]Fc
Find the previous character c in the current line.
@item [count]tC
Equivalent to f followed by h.
@item [count]Tc
Equivalent to F followed by l.
@item [count];
Repeat count times the last find command (f, F, t, or T).
@item [count],
Reverse the last find command count times.
@item 0
Move the cursor to the start of line.
@item ^
Move the cursor to start of line.
@item [H
Move the cursor to the first non-blank character in line.
@item $
Move the cursor to the end of line.
@item [Y
Move the cursor to the end of line.
@item %
Moves to balancing brace or bracket.
@end table

@subheading Search Edit Commands

@table @code
@item [count]k
Fetch a previous command, @code{count} entries back.
@item [count]-
Fetch a previous command, @code{count} entries back. Equivalent to k.
@item [count][A
Fetch a previous command, @code{count} entries back. Equivalent to k.
@item [count]j
Fetch the next command, @code{count} entries forward.
@item [count]+
Fetch the next command, @code{count} entries forward. Equivalent to j.
@item [count][B
Fetch the next command, @code{count} entries forward. Equivalent to j.
@item [count]G
Fetch command number @code{count}. The default is the last history entry.
@item /string
Search history backwards for a command containing string. If
string start with @code{^}, the matched line must begin with @code{string}.
If @code{string} is null, the last entered string is used.
@item ?string
Search history forwards for a command containing string. If
string starts with @code{^}, the matched line must begin with @code{string}.
If @code{string} is null, the last entered string is used.
@item n
Search backwards for the next match of the last pattern to @code{/}
or @code{?}.
@item N
Search forwards for the next match of the last pattern to @code{/} or
@code{?}.
@end table

@subheading Text Modification Edit Commands

@table @code
@item a
Enter input mode and enter text after the current character.
@item A
Append text to the end of line.
@item [count]cmotion
@item c[count]motion
Delete all characters from the current character up to the character
that @code{motion} would move the cursor to, and then enter the
input mode. If @code{motion} is @code{c}, the entire line is deleted and the
input mode is entered.
@item C
Delete all characters from the current character up to the end
of line and then enter the input mode.
@item S
Equivalent to cc.
@item [count]s
Replace characters under the cursor in the input mode.
@item D[count]dmotion
Delete all characters from the current character up to the end of line.
@item d[count]motion
Delete all characters from the current character up to the character
that @code{motion} would move the cursor to. If @code{motion} is @code{d}, the
entire line is deleted.
@item i
Enter the input mode and insert text before the current character.
@item I
Insert text before the beginning of the line.
@item [count]P
Yank (paste) text before the cursor.
@item [count]p
Yank (paste) text after the cursor.
@item R
Enter the input mode and replace characters on the screen with
characters to be typed, as if the user pressed the @key{INSERT} key.
@item [count]rc
Replace @code{count} characters, starting at the cursor position, with
@code{c}, then advance the cursor.
@item [count]x
Delete the current character.
@item [count]X
Delete the preceding character.
@item [count].
Repeat the previous text modification command.
@item [count]~
Invert the case of @code{count} characters, starting at the cursor
position, then advance the cursor.
@item [count]_
Append the @code{count} word of the previous command to the line and
enter the input mode. The last word is used if @code{count} is omitted.
@item *
Append a @code{*} to the current word and attemp file name completion.
If no match is found, the bell is ringed. Otherwise, the
word is replaced by the match and input mode is entered.
@item \
Perform command or file name completion.
@end table

@subheading Other Edit Commands

@table @code
@item [count]ymotion
@item y[count]motion
Yank (copy) all characters from the current character up to the
character to which @code{motion} would move the cursor. Yanked characters
are saved in a special buffer. The cursor position is not changed.

@item yy
Yank (copy) the current line.

@item Y
Yank (copy) the current line from the cursor position to the end
of the line.

@item U
Undo all the text modifying commands performed on current line.

@item [count]V
Return the command:
@example
fc -e $@{VISUAL:-$@{EDITOR:-vi@}@} count
@end example
in the input buffer. If @code{count} is omitted, the current line is used.
@item ^L
Print a line feed and then print the current line. Works in @strong{control mode}.
@item ^J
Print a new line and then execute the current line. Works in both modes.
@item ^M
Return and execute the current line. Works in both modes.
@item #
Comment or uncomment the current line.
@item @@letter
Search for an alias by the name @code{letter}. If an alias of this name
is found, insert its value on the input buffer.
@item ^V
Display the version of the shell.
@end table




@node Builtin Utilities
@chapter Builtin Utilities
@cindex Builtin Utilities

The following simple commands are executed in the shell process, i.e.
no subshell is invoked. Input and output redirection is allowed and
affects the current shell. Except for @code{:}, @code{true}, @code{false},
@code{echo}, @code{newgrp}, and @code{login}, all builtin utilities
accept @code{--} to indicate the end of options and start of arguments.
Unless otherwise stated, the @code{-h} option prints a short history and usage
message, while the @code{-v} option prints the utility (i.e. the shell)'s version.

@table @code
@item : [arg ...]
Expand parameters only.

@item . name [arg ...]
If @code{name} is a defined function, the function is executed in the
current shell environment. If name refers to a file, the file is
read and the commands are executed in the current shell environ-
ment. If any arguments are specified, they become the positional
parameters for the command. The exit status is the exit status
of the last command executed.

@item alias [-hv] [name[=value]] ...
With no arguments, prints the list of aliases in the form of
@code{name=value} on stdout. When one or more arguments are
specified, an alias is defined for each @code{name} whose value is
specified. For each @code{name} in the argument list for which no value
is specified, the name and value of the alias is printed. The
exit status is non-zero if a @code{name} is specified for which no
alias is defined.

@item bg [-hv] [job...]
If job control is on (the @code{monitor} option is set), put each specified
@code{job} in the background. If no @code{job} is specified, the current
job is put in the background. See @xref{Jobs} for a description of the format of @code{job}.

@item break [n]
 Exit from the @code{n}-th enclosing @strong{for}, @strong{while}, @strong{until},
or @strong{select} loop, if any. If @code{n} is not specified, it defaults to 1.

@item bugreport
Send bugreports to the shell's author(s).

@item builtin [-hvsra] [name [args ...]]
If @code{name} is not specified, a list of builtins is printed on
stdout. @code{name} is the name of a shell builtin utility to invoke.
@code{args} are the arguments to pass to the builtin utility. The @code{-s} option
prints the special builtins, The @code{-r} option prints the regular builtins, and
the @code{-a} option prints both.

@item caller [n]
Print the context of any active subroutine call. @code{-n} is a non-negative integer
denoting one of the callframe in the current call stack. The current frame is 0.
Each call to a function or dot script results in a new entry added to the call stack.

@item cd [-h] [-nplv] [-L|-P] [directory]
@item cd [-h] [-nplv] -
In the first form @code{cd} changes the current directory to the given
@code{directory}. If @code{directory} is a hyphen @code{-}, the directory is changed to the
previous directory. If no @code{directory} is given, shell variable @code{$HOME} is
used. Shell variable @code{$PWD} is set to the current directory. Shell
variable @code{$CDPATH}, if set, gives the search path for the directory
containing @code{directory}. It is composed of a colon-separated list of
directory names. If @code{directory} begins with a @code{/}, @code{$CDPATH} is not used.
@*

Symbolic link names are treated literally when parsing directory
names. This is what the @code{-P} option does (physical treatment of
links). The @code{-L} option causes symbolic links to be resolved when
determining the directory (logical treatment of links). If both
options are supplied, the last instance of on the command line
determines which option is used. Restricted shells cannot execute @code{cd}.
@*

The @code{-l}, @code{-n}, @code{-p}, and @code{-v} options have the same meaning as
when used with the @code{dirs} builtin. They all imply @code{-p}.

@item command [-hp] [arg ...]
@item command [-hp] [-v|-V] name
Without passing the @code{-v} or @code{-V} options, @code{command} executes @code{name} with
@code{arg} as arguments. The @code{-p} option forces the use of a default path
guaranteed to find all commands on the system. The @code{-v} option
prints a description of @code{name} if used as a command name within
the shell. The @code{-V} option prints a more verbose output.

@item continue [n]
Resume the next iteration of the @code{n}-th enclosing @strong{for}, @strong{while},
@strong{until}, or @strong{select} loop. If @code{n} is not specified, it defaults to 1.

@item coproc command [redirections]
Execute @code{command} in a coprocess (subshell with pipe). @code{redirections} are
optional file redirections. A pipe is opened between the shell and the coprocess
before any redirections are performed. Shell variable @code{$COPROC_PID} contains
the @code{PID} of the coprocess. Shell variable @code{$COPROC0} points to the
reading end of the pipe (connected to command's stdout), while variable @code{$COPROC1}
points to the writing end of the pipe (connected to command's stdin). You can feed
output to the process by invoking:

@example
$ cmd >&p
@end example

Similarly, you can read the process's output by invoking:

@example
$ cmd <&p
@end example

@item declare [-hvfFgrxlut] [-p] [name=[value]...]
Declare variables and give them attributes. @code{name} is the name of the variable
to which an attribute or value is set, and @code{value} is the value to give to the
variable. The @code{-f} option restricts output to shell functions. The @code{-F}
option doesn't print function definitions. The @code{-g} option declares/modifies
variables at the global scope. The @code{-l} option converts all characters in
variable's value to lowercase on assignment. The @code{-p} option prints the
attributes and values of each @code{name}. The @code{-r} option marks each
@code{name} as readonly. The @code{-t} option gives functions the @code{trace}
attribute (doesn't work on variables). The @code{-u} option converts all characters
in variable's value to uppercase on assignment. The @code{-x} option marks each
@code{name} for export.

@item dirs [-hclpv] [+N | -N]
@item dirs -S|-L [filename]
Display the contents of the directory stack.
The @code{+N} argument prints the N-th directory from the top (the left side
of the printed list), counting from zero (which is the current working directory).
The @code{-N} argument prints the N-th directory from the bottom (the right side
of the printed list), counting from zero (which is the first dir pushed on the
stack). @code{filename} is the file to save/load the directory stack to/from.
The @code{-c} option clears the stack, i.e. removes all directories. The @code{-l}
option prints full pathnames, it doesn't use ~ to indicate the home directory.
The @code{-L} option loads the directory stack from the given filename. If no
filename is supplied, uses @code{$DIRSFILE} or defaults to @file{~/.lshdirs}.
The @code{-n} option wraps entries before they reach edge of the screen.
The @code{-p} option prints each directory on a separate line. The @code{-S}
option saves the directory stack to the given filename. If no filename is
supplied, uses @code{$DIRSFILE} or defaults to @file{~/.lshdirs}. The @code{-v}
option prints each directory with its index on a separate line.

@item disown [-arsv] [-h] [job ...]
Do not to send a @code{HUP} signal to each specified @code{job}, or to all
active jobs if @code{job} is omitted, when a login shell exits.
The @code{-a} option disown all jobs. The @code{-h} option doesn't remove jobs
from the jobs table, only marks them as disowned. The @code{-r} option disowns
only running jobs, while @code{-s} option disowns only stopped jobs.

@item dump [-hv] [argument ...]
Dumps memory values of the passed arguments.
@code{argument} can be one of the following:
@itemize
@item @code{symtab} will print the contents of the local symbol table
@item @code{vars} will print out the shell variable list (similar to @code{declare -p})
@end itemize

@item echo [-enE] [arg ...]
Print each of the arguments separated by a space and terminated by a newline.
The @code{-e} option allows escaped characters in @code{arg}s. The @code{-E}
option doesn't allow escaped characters. The @code{-n} option suppresses
newline echoing.

@item enable [-ahnprsv] [name ...]
Enables/disables shell builtins. @code{name} is the name of a shell builtin
utility to enable or disable. The @code{-a} option prints a list of all builtins,
enabled and disabled. The @code{-n} option disables each listed builtin. The @code{-p}
option prints a list of enabled builtins. The @code{-r} option prints a list of
enabled and disabled regular builtins. The @code{-s} option print a list of
enabled and disabled special builtins.

@item eval [arg ...]
The arguments are read as input to the shell and the resulting
commands are executed.

@item exec [-cl] [-a arg0 ...] [arg ...]
If one or more @code{arg} is specified, the command is executed in
place of this shell without forking a new process. The @code{-c} option
clears the environment before applying variable assignments
associated with the @code{exec} invocation. The @code{-a} option causes @code{arg0},
rather than @code{arg[0]}, to become the first argument for the new
process. If @code{arg} is not specified, @code{exec} modifies the file
descriptors of the shell, as indicated by the input/output redirection list.
The @code{-l} option places a dash in front of @strong{argv[0]}, just as the
@code{login} utility does.

@item exit [n]
Exit the shell with the exit status @code{n}. The value is the least
significant 8 bits of @code{n}. If @code{n} is omitted, the exit status is
that of the last command executed.

@item export [-hvn] [-p] [name [=value] ] ...
If @code{name} is not specified, the names and values of each variable
with the @code{export} attribute are printed with the values quoted to
allow reentry to the shell. The @code{-p} option causes the word
@code{export} to be printed before each name. Otherwise, the specified
names are marked for export to the environment of commands executed by the shell.
The @code{-n} option removes the export attribute of the passed variable @code{name}s.

@item false
Return false result (non-zero exit status).

@item fc [-hvr] [-e editor] [first [last]]
@item fc -l [-hvnr] [first [last]]
@item fc -s [-hv] [old=new] [first]
In the first form, a range of commands from @code{first} to @code{last} is
selected from the history list. @code{first} and @code{last} can be specified
as numbers or strings. A string finds the most recent command
starting with the given string. A negative number gives an offset,
relative to the current command number. In the third form, @code{old=new}
replaces the first occurence of @code{old} with @code{new}
in the command. The @code{-e} option specifies the editor to use when editing
commands, which is passed as the @code{editor} argument. @code{editor} is invoked
on a temporary file containing the selected commands. If @code{editor} is not
supplied, the value of @code{$FCEDIT} is used. If this is null or empty, the
value of @code{$HISTEDIT} is used. If null or empty, the value of @code{$EDITOR} is
used. Otherwise, the default editor (@code{/bin/ed}) is used. When
editing finishes, the edited commands are executed. If @code{last} is
not specified, it is set to @code{first}. If @code{first} is not specified,
it defaults to the previous command for editing and -16 for
listing. The @code{-l} option
lists commands instead of invoking them. The @code{-n} option suppresses command
numbers when listing. The @code{-r} option reverses the order of listed/edited
commands. The @code{-s} option re-executes commands without invoking the editor.

@item fg [-hv] [job ...]
If job control is on (the @code{monitor} option is set), put each specified
@code{job} in the foreground. If no job is specified, the current
job is put in the foreground. See @xref{Jobs} for a
description of the format of @code{job}.

@item getopts optstring varname [arg ...]
Check @code{arg} for legal options. If @code{arg} is omitted, positional
parameters are used. An option argument can begin with a @code{+} or
@code{-}. An option that does not begin with @code{+} or @code{-}, or
the special argument @code{--}, ends the options list. Options beginning
with @code{+} are only recognized when the @code{optstring} begins with a
@code{+}. The @code{optstring} contains letters that @code{getopts} recognizes as
valid options. If a letter is followed by @code{:}, that option is
expected to have an argument. Options can be separated from
their arguments by spaces. @code{getopts} places the next option letter
in the variable @code{varname}. The option letter is preceded by a @code{+}
when @code{arg} begins with a @code{+}. The index of the next @code{arg} is stored
in the shell variable @code{$OPTIND}. The option argument, if any is
found, is stored in @code{$OPTARG}. A leading @code{:} in @code{optstring} causes
@code{getopts} to store the letter of an invalid option in @code{$OPTARG} and
set the value of @code{varname} to @code{?} for an unknown option, and to
@code{:} when a required option argument is missing. Otherwise,
@code{getopts} prints an error message. The exit status is non-zero
when options are finished. Options @code{:}, @code{+}, @code{-}, @code{?},
@code{[}, and @code{]} are not allowed.

@item glob [-eE] [args...]
Echoes @code{args}, delimited by NULL characters.
The @code{-e} option allows escaped characters in arguments. The @code{-E} option
doesn't allow escaped characters in arguments. This utility doesn't recognize
the @code{-n} option as does @code{echo}.

@item hash [-hvld] [-p path] [-r] utility...
@item hash -a
Remembers/reports utility locations. @code{utility} is the name of a utility to
search and add to the hashtable. The @code{-a} option forgets, then re-searches
and re-hashes all utilities whose names are currently in the hashtable.
The @code{-d} option forgets the location of each passed @code{utility}.
The @code{-l} option prints the list of hashed utilities and their paths.
The @code{-p} option performs utility search using @code{path} instead of
the @code{$PATH} variable. The @code{-r} option forgets all previously
remembered utility locations.

@item help [-ds] [command]
Shows help for builtin utilities and commands. The @code{-d} option prints a
short description of each @code{command}. The @code{-s} option prints the
usage or synopsis of each @code{command}.

@item history [-hR] [n]
@item history -c
@item history -d offset
@item history -d start-end
@item history [-anrwSL] [filename]
@item history -ps arg ...
Prints command history. The @code{n} argument prints only the last @code{n} lines.
The @code{-a} option appends the in-memory history list to @file{filename}.
If @file{filename} is not supplied, the default history file is used. The @code{-c}
option clears the history list. The @code{-d} option deletes the history entry at
position @code{offset}. Negative offsets count from the end of the list; offset -1
is the last command entered. The @code{-d} option deletes history entries between
offsets @code{start} and @code{end}, which can be negative, as described above.
The @code{-h} option prints history entries without leading numbers. The @code{-L}
option is equivalent to @code{-r}. The @code{-n} option appends the entries from
@file{filename} to the in-memory list. If @file{filename} is not supplied, the
default history file is used. The @code{-p} option performs history substitution
on @code{arg}s and prints the result on stdout. The @code{-r} option reads the
history file and append the entries to the in-memory list. The @code{-R} option
reverses the listing order (most recent entries are printed first). The @code{-s} option
adds @code{arg}s to the end of the history list as one entry. The @code{-S} option
is equivalent to @code{-w}. The @code{-w} option writes out the current in-memory
list to @file{filename}. If @file{filename} is not supplied, the default history
file is used.

@item hup [command]
Runs a command so that it can receive @code{SIGHUP} signal. Commands can override
this by defining their own signal handlers.

@item jobs [-hnrsv] [-l|-p] [job ...]
@item jobs -x command [argument ...]
In the first form, lists information about each @code{job}, or all active jobs if @code{job} is
omitted. The @code{-l} option lists jobs' PIDs in addition to the normal
information. The @code{-n} option only displays jobs that have
stopped or exited since the last notification. The @code{-p} option
lists only the process groups ids. The @code{-r} option reports only running jobs, while
the @code{-s} option reports stopped jobs. See @xref{Jobs} for a
description of the format of @code{job}.
@*

In the second form (with @code{-x}), replaces all occurences of @code{job}s
in @code{command} and @code{argument}s with the process group ID of the
respective job, then runs @code{command}, passing it the given @code{arguments}.

@item kill [-s signame] job ...
@item kill [-n signum] job ...
@item kill -l|-L [sig ...]
@item kill [-signame] job ...
@item kill [-signum] job ...
Send either the @code{TERM} signal or the specified signal to the given
jobs or processes. Signals are either specified as numeric arguments
to the @code{-n} option, or by symbolic names to the @code{-s} option,
without the @code{SIG} prefix. The @code{-n} and @code{-s} options can be omitted
and the signal number or name placed immediately after the @code{-}.
See @xref{Jobs} for a description of the format of @code{job}. In
the third form, if @code{sig} is not specified, signal names are
listed. Otherwise, for each symbolic @code{sig}, the corresponding
signal number is listed. For each numeric @code{sig}, the corresponding
signal name is listed.

@item let [arg ...]
Evaluate each @code{arg} as an arithmetic expression. See
@xref{Arithmetic expansion} for a description of arithmetic expression
evaluation. The exit status is 0 if the value of the last
expression is non-zero, 1 otherwise.

@item local name[=word] ...
Define local variable @code{name}, setting the local attribute to it and giving
it the value @code{word}.

@item logout [n]
Exit a login shell, returning @code{n} as the exit status code.

@item mailcheck [-hvq]
Check for mail at specified intervals. The @code{-q} causes @code{mailcheck} not to
output messages in case of error or no mail available.

@item memusage arg...
Show the shell's memory usage. Each @code{arg} shows the memory allocated for
a different shell internal structure, which can be one of the following:

@table @code
@item aliases
memory allocated for alias names and values
@item cmdbuf, cmdbuffer
memory allocated for the command line buffer
@item dirstack
memory allocated for the directory stack
@item hash, hashtab
memory allocated for the commands hashtable
@item history
memory allocated for the command line history table
@item input
memory allocated for the currently executing translation unit
@item stack, symtabs
memory allocated for the symbol table stack
@item strbuf, strtab
memory allocated for the internal strings buffer
@item traps
memory allocated for the signal traps
@item vm
memory usage of different segments (RSS, stack, data)
@end table

The @code{-l} option shows long output (i.e. prints more details).

@item newgrp [-hv] [-l] [group]
Create a new group and restart the shell in a new execution environment.
@code{group} is the group name (or ID) to which the real and effective group
IDs shall be set. The @code{-l} option changes the environment to a login environment.

@item nice [+n] [command]
@item nice [-n] [command]
Run a command with the given priority. @code{n} can be positive or negative, specifying
the nice priority to give to @code{command}, or the shell if no @code{command} is
given (the plus sign can be omitted for positive nice values). On many systems, only
@code{root} can pass negative nice values. @code{command} is the command to run under
priority @code{n}, which must be an external command.

@item nohup [command]
Run a command, ignoring SIGHUP. As with @code{nice}, @code{command} must be an external command.

@item notify [job ...]
Notify immediately when jobs change status. @code{notify} is the job id of the job
to mark for immediate notification. See @xref{Jobs} for a description of the format of @code{job}.

@item popd [-chlnpsv] [+N | -N]
Pop directories off the stack and @code{cd} to them. If @code{N} is positive, it removes
the N-th directory, counting from 0 from the left. If it is negative, it removes the
N-th directory, counting from 0 from the right. If called without arguments, @code{popd}
removes the top directory from the stack and calls @code{cd} to change the current
working directory to the new top directory (equivalent to @code{popd +0}.
The @code{-c} option manipulates the stack without @code{cd}ing to the directory.
The @code{-s} option suppresses the output the dirstack after popping off it.
The @code{-l}, @code{-n}, @code{-v}, and @code{-p} options have the same meaning as for
the @code{dirs} builtin.

@item printenv [-hv0] [name ...]
Print the names and values of environment variables identified by each @code{name}.
The @code{-0} option terminates each entry with NULL instead of a newline character.

@item pushd [-chlnpsv] [+N | -N | dir]
Push directories on the stack and @code{cd} to them. If @code{N} is positive, it
rotates the stack and bring the N-th directory, counting from 0 from the left, to
the top of the stack. If it is negative, it rotates the stack and bring the N-th
directory, counting from 0 from the right, to the top of the stack. If @code{dir}
is supplied, it is pushed on the stack and @code{cd} is called to change the working
directory to @code{dir}. If @code{dir} is dash @code{-}, this equals the previous
working directory, as stored in the @code{$PWD} variable.
The @code{-c} option manipulates the stack without @code{cd}ing to the directory.
The @code{-s} option suppresses the output the dirstack after popping off it.
The @code{-l}, @code{-n}, @code{-v}, and @code{-p} options have the same meaning as for
the @code{dirs} builtin.
@*

If called without arguments, @code{pushd} exchanges the top two directories on the
stack and calls @code{cd} to change the current working directory to the new top
directory. If the @code{pushdtohome} extra option is set (by calling @code{setx -s pushdtohome}),
@code{pushd} pushes the value of @code{$HOME} and @code{cd}'s to it instead of
exchanging the top two directories. If the @code{dunique} extra option is set,
@code{pushd} removes instances of @code{dir} from the stack before pushing it.
If the @code{dextract} extra option is set, @code{pushd} extracts the N-th directory
and pushes it on top of the stack.

@item pwd [-hv] [-L|-P]
Output the value of the current working directory. The @code{-L} option
is the default option, which prints the logical name of the current
working directory. If the @code{-P} option is specified, symbolic
links are resolved. If both options are supplied, the last
instance of @code{-L} or @code{-P} determines which option is used.

@item read [-hv] [-rs] [-d delim] [-nN n] [-t timeout] [-u fd] [-p msg] [varname ...]
Read a line and break it up into fields using @code{$IFS} characters as
field separators. The escape character @code{\} removes the special
meaning for the following character and for line continuation.
The @code{-d} option causes read to continue reading input up to the
first character of delim, rather than @code{\n}. The @code{-n} option causes
at most @code{n} bytes to be read, rather than a complete line. The @code{-N}
option causes exactly @code{n} bytes to be read, unless @code{EOF} has been
reached, or the read timed out because of the @code{-t} option. The @code{-r}
causes the @code{\} character to lose its special meaning as an
escape character. The first field is assigned to the first @code{varname},
the second field to the second @code{varname}, and so on. Extra
fields are assigned to the last @code{varname}. If the @code{-s} option is
supplied, input is saved as a command in the history list. The
@code{-u} option specifies a one digit file descriptor to read input
from. The @code{-t} option specifies timeout (in seconds) when reading
from a terminal or pipe. If @code{varname} is omitted, @code{$REPLY} is used
as the default variable name.
The @code{-p} option prints the string @code{msg} before reading input.
The exit status is 0 unless @code{EOF}
is encountered or @code{read} timed out.

@item readonly [-p] [name[=value]] ...
If @code{name} is not specified, the names and values of readonly
variables are printed with the values quoted to allow reinput to the
shell. The @code{-p} option causes the word @code{readonly} to be inserted
before each name. Otherwise, the specified names are marked as readonly.

@item repeat [-hv] count command
Repeat executing @code{command} for @code{count} times.

@item return [n]
Return from a shell function or script with the exit status @code{n}.
The value returned is the least significant 8 bits of @code{n}. If @code{n} is
omitted, the return status is that of the last command executed.
If @code{return} is invoked while not in a function or script, it
behaves in the same way as @code{exit}.

@item set [-BCEGHTabdefhkmnoprstuvx] [-o [option]] ... [arg ...]
@item set [+BCEGHTabdefhkmnoprstuvx] [+o [option]] ... [arg ...]
Set or unset shell options. This utility supports the following options:

@table @strong
@item -a
All subsequent variables that are defined are marked for export.
@item -b
Print job completion messages as soon as a background job changes state.
@item -B
Enable brace pattern field generation. This is set by default.
@item -C
Prevent output redirection operators from truncating existing
files. Files created are opened with the @code{O_EXCL} mode. @code{>|} must be
used in order to truncate a file when this option is set.
@item -d
Dump the parser's Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) before executing commands.
@item -e
If a command exits with non-zero exit status, execute the @code{ERR}
trap, if set, and exit the shell.
@item -E
@code{ERR} traps are inherited by shell functions, command substitutions and subshells.
@item -f
Disable file name generation.
@item -h
Hash all command names on first encounter.
@item -H
Enable history substitution.
@item -k
All variable assignments are placed in the environment for a
command, not just those that precede the command name.
@item -m
Turn on job control. Background jobs are run in separate process
groups. Exit status of background jobs is reported in a message.
This option is set automatically for interactive shells.
@item -n
Read commands but don't execute them. Ignored by interactive shells.
@item -o
If no option is supplied, print the list of options and their
current settings to stdout. When invoked as @code{+o}, options are
printed in a format that can be reinput to the shell to restore
the settings.
@*

The following options can be passed to @code{-o}:
@itemize
@item @emph{allexport}: Same as -a.
@item @emph{braceexpand}: Same as -B.
@item @emph{errexit}: Same as -e.
@item @emph{errtrace}: Same as -E.
@item @emph{functrace}: Same as -T.
@item @emph{hashall}: Same as -h.
@item @emph{hashexpand}: Same as -H.
@item @emph{history}: Same as -w.
@item @emph{ignoreeof}: The shell does not exit on EOF.
@item @emph{keyword}: Same as -k.
@item @emph{monitor}: Same as -m.
@item @emph{noclobber}: Same as -C.
@item @emph{noexec}: Same as -n.
@item @emph{noglob}: Same as -f.
@item @emph{nolog}: Do not save function definitions in the history file.
@item @emph{notify}: Same as -b.
@item @emph{nounset}: Same as -u.
@item @emph{onecmd}: Same as -t.
@item @emph{pipefail}: Pipeline exit status is that of the rightmost command with non-zero exit status.
@item @emph{privileged}: Same as -p.
@item @emph{verbose}: Same as -v.
@item @emph{vi}: Enter vi insert mode until ESC (033) is pressed, where control mode is entered.
@item @emph{xtrace}: Same as -x.
@end itemize

If no option name is supplied, the current options settings are printed.

@item -p
Enter the privileged mode. Disable processing of the @file{$HOME/.profile}
file. This mode is set if the effective uid (or gid) is
not equal to the real uid (or gid). Turning this option off
causes the effective uid and gid to be set to the real uid and gid.
@item -r
Enable the restricted shell. This option cannot be unset once set.
@item -t
Exit after reading and executing one command.
@item -T
@code{DEBUG} and @code{RETURN} traps are inherited by shell functions, command substitutions
and subshells.
@item -u
Treat unset parameters as error when performing variable substitution.
@item -v
Print shell input lines as they are read.
@item -x
Print the command line as commands are executed.
@item --
Do not change any of the options. Useful when setting @code{$1} to a
value that begins with @code{-}. If no arguments follow this option,
positional parameters are unset.
@end table

Using @code{+} instead of @code{-} causes options to be turned off. These
options can be passed to the shell on invocation. The current
set of options can be viewed by reading the shell variable @code{$-}.
The remaining arguments are treated as positional parameters and
assigned to @code{$1}, @code{$2}, and so on. If no arguments are specified,
the names and values of all shell variables are printed on stdout.

@item setenv [-hv] [name[=value] ...]
Set the value of environment variable @code{name} to @code{value}, or NULL if
no @code{value} is given. This utility sets both the environment variable
and the shell variable with the same @code{name}. If no arguments are given,
it prints the names and values of all the set environment variables.

@item setx [-hvpsuqo] option
Set and unset optional (extra) shell options. @code{option} can be any of the
following (the name inside brackets is the shell from which the option was
taken/based; @strong{int} means interactive shell, while @strong{non-int}
means non-interactive shell):

@table @code
@item addsuffix
append space to file- and slash to dir-names on tab completion (tcsh)
@item autocd
dirs passed as single-word commands are passed to @code{cd} (bash int)
@item cdable_vars
@code{cd} arguments can be variable names (bash)
@item cdable-vars
same as the above
@item checkhash
for hashed commands, check the file exists before exec'ing (bash)
@item checkjobs
list stopped/running jobs and warn user before exit (bash int)
@item checkwinsize
check window size after external cmds, updating @code{$LINES} and @code{$COLUMNS} (bash)
@item clearscreen
clear the screen on shell's startup
@item cmdhist
save multi-line command in a single history entry (bash)
@item complete_fullquote
quote metacharacters in filenames during completion (bash)
@item complete-fullquote
same as the above
@item dextract
@code{pushd} extracts the given dir instead of rotating the stack (tcsh)
@item dotglob
files starting with @code{.} are included in filename expansion (bash)
@item dunique
@code{pushd} removes similar entries before pushing dir on the stack (tcsh)
@item execfail
failing to @code{exec} a file doesn't exit the shell (bash non-int)
@item expand_aliases
perform alias expansion (bash)
@item expand-aliases
same as the above
@item extglob
enable ksh-like extended pattern matching (bash)
@item failglob
failing to match filenames to patterns result in expansion error (bash)
@item force_fignore
@code{$FIGNORE} determines which words to ignore on word expansion (bash)
@item force-fignore
same as the above
@item globasciiranges
bracket pattern matching expressions use the C locale (bash)
@item histappend
append (don't overwrite) the history list to @code{$HISTFILE} (bash)
@item histreedit
enable the user to re-redit a failed history substitution (bash int)
@item histverify
reload (instead of directly execute) history substitution results (bash int)
@item hostcomplete
perform hostname completion for words containing @code{@@} (bash int)
@item huponexit
send @code{SIGHUP} to all jobs on exit (bash int login)
@item inherit_errexit
command substitution subshells inherit the @code{-e} option (bash)
@item inherit-errexit
same as the above
@item interactive_comments
recognize @code{#} as the beginning of a comment (bash int)
@item interactive-comments
same as the above
@item lastpipe
last cmd of foreground pipeline is run in the current shell (bash)
@item lithist
save multi-line commands with embedded newlines (bash with 'cmdhist' on)
@item listjobs
list jobs when a job changes status (tcsh)
@item listjobs_long
list jobs (detailed) when a job changes status (tcsh)
@item listjobs-long
same as the above
@item localvar_inherit
local vars inherit value/attribs from previous scopes (bash)
@item localvar-inherit
same as the above
@item localvar_unset
allow unsetting local vars in previous scopes (bash)
@item localvar-unset
same as the above
@item login_shell
indicates a login shell (cannot be changed) (bash)
@item login-shell
same as the above
@item mailwarn
warn about mail files that have already been read (bash)
@item nocaseglob
perform case-insensitive filename expansion (bash)
@item nocasematch
perform case-insensitive pattern matching (bash)
@item nullglob
patterns expanding to 0 filenames expand to "" (bash)
@item printexitvalue
output non-zero exit status for external commands (tcsh)
@item progcomp
enable programmable completion (not yet implemented) (bash)
@item progcomp_alias
allow alias expansion in completions (not yet implemented) (bash)
@item promptvars
perform word expansion on prompt strings (bash)
@item pushdtohome
pushd without arguments pushed @code{~} on the stack (tcsh)
@item recognize_only_executables
only executables are recognized in command completion (tcsh)
@item recognize-only-executables
same as the above
@item restricted_shell
indicates a restricted shell (cannot be changed) (bash)
@item restricted-shell
same as the above
@item savedirs
save the directory stack when login shell exits (tcsh)
@item savehist
save the history list when shell exits (tcsh)
@item shift_verbose
allow the shift builtin to output error messages (bash)
@item shift-verbose
same as the above
@item sourcepath
the source builtin uses @code{$PATH} to find files (bash)
@item usercomplete
perform hostname completion for words starting with @code{~}
@item xpg_echo
echo expands backslash escape sequences by default (bash)
@item xpg-echo
same as the above
@end table

The @code{-o} option restricts options to those recognized by @code{set -o}.
The @code{-p} option prints output that can be re-input to the shell.
The @code{-q} option suppresses normal output. the return status tells whether options are set or not.
The @code{-s} option sets (enables) each passed option.
The @code{-u} option unsets (disables) each passed option.

@item shift [n]
Positional parameters from @code{$n+1} onwards are renamed @code{$1 ...}. The
default value if @code{n} is omitted is 1. @code{n} should be a non-negative
number less than or equal to @code{$#}.

@item source [-hv] file
Execute commands in the current environment. Commands are read from @code{file}
and then executed in the current execution environment. This command is the
same as @code{dot} or @code{.}, except when the @code{-h} option is given, where
@code{file} is read and the commands are added to the history list, which is
identical to invoking @code{history -L}.

@item stop [-hv] job ...
Stop each background job specified by @code{job}.
See @xref{Jobs} for a description of the format of @code{job}.

@item suspend [-fhv]
Suspend execution of the shell. The @code{-f} option forces the suspend, even
if the shell is a login shell.

@item test -option expression
Test file attributes and compare strings. For the list of options and
their meanings, see @xref{Conditional Expressions}.

@item times
Write process times.

@comment @item time command
@comment Write execution times for @code{command}.

@item trap [-hvlp] [action] [sig] ...
The @code{-p} option causes the trap action associated with each specified
trap to be printed. Otherwise, @code{action} is processed as if
passed to @code{eval} when the shell receives the signal @code{sig}, which can
be a signal number or a symbolic name. Signals ingored on shell
startup cannot be trapped or reset. If @code{action} is omitted and the
first @code{sig} is a number, or if @code{action} is a hyphen @code{-}, traps for
each @code{sig} are reset to their original values. If @code{action} is a null
string, the signal is ignored by the shell and its children. If
@code{sig} is @code{ERR}, action is executed whenever a command returns non-
zero exit status. If sig is @code{DEBUG}, action is executed before
each command is executed. If sig is @code{0} or @code{EXIT}, @code{action}
is executed on exit from the shell. If no arguments are supplied, @code{trap}
prints the traps associated with each signal number.
The @code{-l} option lists all conditions and their signal numbers.
The @code{-p} option prints the trap actions associated with each @code{sig}.

@item true
Return true result (zero exit status).

@item type command ...
Write a description of @code{command} type.

@item ulimit [-h] [-acdflmnpstuvHS] [limit]
Set or display resource limits. The limit for a specified
resource is set when @code{limit} is specified. The value of @code{limit} can
be numeric, or one of the special values @code{unlimited}, @code{soft} or
@code{hard}. When more than one resource is specified, the limit name
and its unit are printed before printing the limit's value. If
no option is specified, @code{-f} is assumed.
@*

The following are the available resource limits:

@table @strong
@item -H
Set or display the hard limit for the specified resource.
@item -S
Set or display the soft limit for the specified resource.
@item -a
List all the current resource limits.
@item -c
The size of core dumps (512-byte blocks).
@item -d
The size of the data segment (Kbytes).
@item -f
The max size of files written by the current process (512-byte blocks).
@item -l
The max size of memory a process may lock.
@item -m
The the size of physical memory (Kbytes).
@item -n
The number of file descriptors.
@item -p
The size of pipe buffers (512-byte blocks).
@item -s
The the size of the stack (Kbytes).
@item -t
The number of CPU seconds to be used by each process.
@item -v
The size of virtual memory (Kbytes).
@end table

@item umask [-hvp] [-S] [mask]
The file creation mask (umask) is set to @code{mask}, which can be
either an octal number or a symbolic value. If a symbolic value
is specified, the new umask is the complement of the result of
applying the given @code{mask} to the complement of the previous umask.
If @code{mask} is omitted, the current value of umask is printed. The
@code{-S} option prints umask as a symbolic value. Otherwise, umask is
printed as an octal number.
The @code{-p} option prints output that can be reused as shell input.

@item unalias [-a] name
Removed the aliases specified by the list of @code{name}s from the
alias list. The @code{-a} option causes all the aliases to be removed.

@item unlimit [-hHfSv] [limit ...]
@item unlimit [-HS] -a
Remove limits on system resource @code{limit}, which can be one of the following:

@table @code
@item core    , -c
the maximum size of core files created
@item data    , -d
the maximum size of a process's data segment
@item nice    , -e
the maximum nice value (scheduling priority)
@item file    , -f
the maximum size of files written by a process
@item signal  , -i
the maximum number of pending signals
@item mlock   , -l
the maximum size of memory a process may lock
@item rss     , -m
the maximum resident set size (RSS)
@item fd      , -n
the maximum number of open file descriptors
@item buffer  , -p
the pipe buffer size in kbytes
@item message , -q
the maximum number of kbytes in POSIX message queues
@item rtprio  , -r
the maximum real-time priority
@item stack   , -s
the maximum stack size
@item cputime , -t
the maximum amount of cpu time (seconds)
@item userproc, -u
the maximum number of user processes
@item virtmem , -v
the size of virtual memory
@item flock   , -x
the maximum number of file locks
@item all     , -a
all the above
@end table

Options and limit names must be passed separately. To remove all hard limits, invoke
either of the following commands:

@example
unlimit -H -a
unlimit -H all
@end example

The @code{-a} option removes limits on all resources.
The @code{-f} option ignores errors.
The @code{-H} option removes hard limits (only root can do this).
The @code{-S} option removes soft limits (the default).

@item unsetenv [-hv] [name ...]
Unset environment variable values. This utility unsets both the environment
variable and the shell variable with the same @code{name}. If no arguments
are given, nothing is done.

@item unset [-fv] varname
Unset the variables specified by the list of @code{varname}s. Readonly
variables cannot be unset. If the @code{-f} option is supplied, the
names are treated as function names. If the @code{-v} option is supplied,
the names are treated as variable names. The default option is @code{-v}.

@item wait [-hfnv] [job ...]
Wait for the specified job or process and report its termination
status. If @code{job} is not specified, all active child processes are
waited for. The exit status is that of the last process waited
for if job is specified, otherwise it is zero. See @xref{Jobs} for
a description of the format of @code{job}.
@*

The @code{-f} option forces jobs/processes to exit.
The @code{-n} option waits for any job or process.

@item whence [-afhpv] name ...
For each @code{name}, indicate how it would be interpreted if it was
used as a command to the shell. The @code{-v} option produces a more
verbose output. The @code{-f} option doesn't search for functions. The
@code{-p} option does a path search for each @code{name} even if it was an
alias, a function, or a reserved word. The @code{-a} option is similar
to @code{-v}, but causes all interpretations of the specified @code{name} to
be printed.
@end table



@node GNU Free Documentation License
@appendix GNU Free Documentation License

@include fdl.texi

@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye
